Interaction dynamics in classroom group work 
Tom´aˇs Lintner a,b,c,*, Tom´aˇs Divi´ak b,d, Barbora Nekardov´a a,e 
a Department of Educational Sciences, Masaryk University, Arna Nov´aka 1/1, Brno 602 00, Czechia 
b Institute SYRI, ˇZerotínovo n´am. 617/9, Brno 601 77, Czechia 
c netanlab, Bratislava, Slovakia 
d Mitchell Centre for Social Network Analysis and Department of Criminology, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK 
e Institute for Research and Development in Education, Charles University, Myslíkova 208/7, Prague 110 00, Czechia   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Group work 
Literacy 
Student talk 
Classroom interaction 
Bursty behavior 
Dynamic social network analysis 
DyNAM 
A B S T R A C T   
Group work in classrooms is employed by teachers across all levels of education. For group work to be effective, 
all students should participate equally. Why some students engage in interaction and how group size and 
composition influence interaction dynamics is a research gap. We employed dynamic actor-oriented models on a 
sample of 145 Czech lower-secondary students in 62 small groups and pooled the results from the groups with a 
meta-analytical procedure. We found bursty behavior resulting from endogenous structural mechanisms of 
reciprocity, transitivity, cyclicity, and preferential attachment. Students gave preference to initiating interactions 
with those they initiated interactions with before and off-task interaction contributed to the development of on- 
task interaction. Students strongly preferred interactions with friends. Those students who talked a lot during 
regular whole-classroom lessons and students with high levels of literacy tended to both initiate and receive more 
interactions in group work, and students similar in these attributes preferred to interact with each other. Group 
size did not affect preferential attachment tendencies in interaction, but smaller groups made the effect of 
friendship ties on interactions stronger, and communication group norms shifted with changing group compo­
sition. Our study shows the suitability of dynamic actor-oriented models for studying interaction in education 
and small groups.   
1. Introduction 
Group work in classrooms is widespread and employed by teachers 
across all education levels. Letting students cooperate, learn from each 
other, and help each other to achieve a common educational goal is 
recognized and sometimes even mandated by educators as a desirable 
part of student-centered learning (Felder and Brent, 1996; Fung, 2022; 
Webb, 2009). For group work to be successful, all students in the group 
should actively participate. However, this is not an easy task. Partici­
pation in group work is usually unequal and entails free-riding – some 
students doing everything while others not contributing at all (Le et al., 
2018; Slavin et al., 2003). Many student- and group-level factors have 
been hypothesized to influence student participation during group work 
(Webb, 2009). Yet, groups are usually arranged by the teacher without 
any consideration for the group composition and the potential effect the 
composition may have on group work (Gillies and Boyle, 2010). 
Most research on what leads to active and equal student participation 
during group work is either qualitative or descriptive. Previous research 
has not considered some important unique characteristics of group work 
stemming from the fact that group work is wholly based on interactions. 
Most studies have operationalized interaction as the number of times 
individual students spoke (see Webb, 1991). Simply counting the 
number of times a student speaks and relating that number to student 
characteristics does not capture the nature of interaction, as it ignores 
their interpersonal structure. Analyses based on such observations may 
lead to results lacking validity because they have omitted fundamental 
properties of interactions, which are inherently dynamic, relational, and 
actor-oriented. They are dynamic because interactions occur over time 
and each interaction is dependent on a previous interaction; for 
example, interactions typically occur in a turn-taking manner such as 
student A addressing student B followed by student B responding to 
student A. They are relational because interactions necessarily occur 
between two or more students; each interaction can therefore be un­
derstood as a tie between a sender and one or more receivers, and over 
time the ties form a network of interactions that forms a structure of 
opportunities for further interaction. Interactions are actor-oriented 
* Corresponding author at: Department of Educational Sciences, Masaryk University, Arna Nov´aka 1/1, Brno 602 00, Czechia. 
E-mail address: tomas.lintner@mail.muni.cz (T. Lintner).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Social Networks 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/socnet 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2024.05.002 
Received 8 October 2023; Received in revised form 24 March 2024; Accepted 26 May 2024   
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
Available online 4 June 2024 
0378-8733/© 2024 The Author (s ). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http ://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
because the individual actors – in our case the students – are agentic and 
make their own choices regarding how they interact and with whom 
(Stadtfeld and Block, 2017). 
A stream of network models developed in recent years, including 
stochastic actor-oriented models (Snijders, 2001), relational event 
models (Butts, 2008), and, most recently, dynamic network actor models 
(Stadtfeld and Block, 2017), aim to capture the dynamic, relational, and 
actor-oriented nature of interaction. Dynamic network actor models 
(DyNAMs) are specifically tailored to fine-grained time-stamped data, 
such as observations of student interactions during group work, and they 
make it possible to capture mechanisms driving student choices to 
interact with other students within a network framework. Despite the 
availability of network models allowing the study of student in­
teractions, the research employing network analysis on classroom 
interaction has thus far focused on whole-classroom communication 
only (e.g., Mameli et al., 2015; Ryu and Lombardi, 2015; Wagner and 
Gonz´alez-Howard, 2018). 
In this study, we aim to provide a new viewpoint on mechanisms 
driving interactions between students in classroom group work by using 
fine-grained time-stamped data from videorecorded group works and 
employing network-based quantitative modelling accounting for the 
dynamic, relational, and actor-oriented nature of interaction. We 
differentiate between on-task and off-task interaction allowing us to 
capture the effect of off-task interaction on-task interaction. We ask two 
questions: 1.) What influences interaction dynamics in classroom group 
work? and 2.) How does group composition influence the interaction dy­
namics in classroom group work? 
2. Theory and hypotheses 
2.1. Temporal aspects of interaction 
The nature of group work depends on the individual interactions 
between students, particularly the order and timing of these in­
teractions. Neglecting the temporal dimension of interaction relates to 
several implicit assumptions – for example, it assumes that interactions 
between actors do not change over time; that interactions are randomly 
distributed over time; and that there is no relationship between the in­
dividual interaction events (Miritello, 2013). These assumptions are, 
however, incorrect. Interactions in group work are not static; actors 
change who they initiate and end interaction with over time, and ties are 
therefore constantly formed and dissolved. Interactions are also not 
randomly distributed over time – it was shown that bursty behavior – 
long periods of activity separated by intense bursts of activity – is a 
universal feature of human interaction (Karsai et al., 2012; Miritello, 
2013; Navarro et al., 2017). Generally, bursty behavior can be described 
as a tendency to more likely to initiate interaction if an interaction 
occurred shortly before (Barabasi, 2005). Hence, we expect the 
following: 
• H1 – general burstiness: students tend to initiate on-task inter­
action if another on-task interaction was initiated recently in the group. 
Moreover, individual interactions are not independent of each other; 
rather, the order and relative timing of interactions affect subsequent 
interactions. It has been established that interactions have a memory 
that leads to old and repeated interactions being more likely to occur 
over time than newly established interactions (Miritello, 2013). Just as 
we expect on-task interaction to stem from previous on-task in­
teractions, we also expect off-task interaction between two students to 
increase likelihood of on-task communication between them. It was 
found that activities unrelated to the task function to support the 
eventual task solution among students and promote the collaborative 
dynamics (Langer-Osuna et al., 2020). Hence: 
• H2a – repeated interaction: students tend to initiate on-task 
interaction with those groupmates that they initiated on-task interac­
tion with before. 
• H2b – cumulative repeated interaction: students’ tendency to 
initiate on-task interaction with a given groupmate increases with each 
repeated initiated on-task interactions with that groupmate before. 
• H2c – off-task to on-task interaction: students’ tendency to 
initiate on-task interaction with a given groupmate increases with each 
repeated initiated off-task interactions with that groupmate before. 
2.2. Relational aspects of interaction 
It is also crucial to consider the relational mechanisms in interaction. 
Each interaction requires a sender and one or more receivers of the 
message. Each interaction in group work then forms some fundamental 
pattern – either a dyad when one actor addresses another, or an outgoing 
star graph when one actor addresses the whole group (Lehmann, 2019). 
We expect several endogenous relational mechanisms to influence 
interaction in group work. 
Preferential attachment was found to be a frequently occurring 
phenomenon in all types of networks (Rivera et al., 2010). In the context 
of interaction networks, preferential attachment denotes the tendency to 
initiate interaction towards those who either initiated or received many 
interactions before, or to receive interaction from those who either 
initiated or received many interactions before. It has been argued that 
this is the result of a tendency of actors looking for new connections to 
use other actors’ degree as a proxy for their suitability – in the context of 
group work, we might expect students to be more likely to interact with 
groupmates who had already initiated or received many interactions, as 
it shows that the student is open to communication. Hence: 
• H3a – ego type indegree preferential attachment: students tend 
to initiate on-task interaction if they received many on-task interactions 
previously. 
• H3b – ego type outdegree preferential attachment: students 
tend to initiate on-task interaction if they initiated many on-task in­
teractions previously. 
• H3c – alter type indegree preferential attachment: students 
tend to receive on-task interaction if they received many on-task in­
teractions previously. 
• H3d – alter type outdegree preferential attachment: students 
tend to receive on-task interaction if they initiated many on-task in­
teractions previously. 
Reciprocity, transitive closure, and cyclic closure also comprise 
universally occurring mechanisms in communication networks (Kossi­
nets and Watts, 2006; Ten Bosch et al., 2005). In the context of inter­
action networks, immediate reciprocity is often interpreted as 
turn-taking behavior (Ten Bosch et al., 2005). Transitive closure is the 
tendency to initiate interaction with those who have been interacted 
with before by the receiver of one’s previous interaction (student A 
addressing student C after student A addressed student B and student B 
addressed student C) – when one student interacts with another, it can 
lead to subsequent interactions among other students who were indi­
rectly connected through the initial interaction. Finally, cyclic closure 
denotes the tendency to initiate interaction with those who have inter­
acted with the sender of one’s previous interaction (student C addressing 
student A after student A addressed student B and student B addressed 
student C). Cyclic closure can be seen as an indirect exchange or 
generalized reciprocity; once established, it was found to be 
self-reinforcing (Bearman, 1997). Hence, we expect: 
• H4a – reciprocity: students tend to receive on-task interaction 
from a student who was the receiver of their interaction before. 
• H4b – transitive closure: students tend to form transitive patterns 
of interaction. 
• H4c – cyclic closure: students tend to form cyclic patterns of 
interaction. 
In addition to the endogenous relational mechanisms, interaction is 
potentially influenced by the friendship ties between individual stu­
dents. On the one hand, friendship may support collaboration and 
learning among group members; on the other hand, it may also lead to 
off-task activities (Chiriac and Granstr¨om, 2012; Myers, 2012). 
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
15 
Although there is a lack of conclusive evidence of the impact of 
friendships among group members on group work activity, we anticipate 
that the presence of a friendship tie between two students will enhance 
the likelihood of on-task interaction between them. This assumption is 
based on the notion that the sense of another person’s likeability typi­
cally increases one’s inclination to engage in conversation with them. 
Hence, we expect: 
• H5 – interaction preference from friendship ties: students tend 
to prefer on-task interactions with groupmates they consider friends. 
2.3. Attribute-related aspects of interaction 
Drawing from expectation states theory, we assume student level of 
vocality during regular lessons and student level of literacy to play roles 
in group work interaction. We understand vocality as a usual tendency 
of a student to speak during regular whole-classroom lessons. Expecta­
tion states theory postulates that, when given a collective task to 
accomplish, individuals bring pre-existing status characteristics into 
group interactions, which influence the group’s power and prestige 
structure. Some members will be more active than others, exercise more 
influence than others, and be rewarded more often than others (Berger 
and Conner, 1969; Correll and Ridgeway, 2003). Vocality and literacy 
are arguably important characteristics influencing student expectations 
and status in group work. Vocality and literacy directly impact a stu­
dent’s ability to communicate and articulate ideas effectively, serving as 
key indicators of competence, leading to higher status within the group 
and greater influence over group dynamics. Furthermore, students 
typically have preconceived notions about their peers’ vocality and lit­
eracy levels well before group work commences, influencing their ex­
pectations and the eventual status dynamics within the group. These 
status characteristics inform members’ expectations for each other’s 
performance and contribution to group tasks, affecting how opportu­
nities to participate and lead are distributed among group members. 
Expectation states theory presumes that student characteristics influ­
ence both expectations of themselves – which is also supported by evi­
dence showing that relative student ability within a group is the 
predictor of their active behavior (Webb, 1991) – as well as expectations 
from others. Hence, we expect: 
• H6a – vocality promoting interaction activity:students with 
higher levels of whole-classroom vocality tend to initiate more on-task 
interactions. 
• H6b – literacy promoting interaction activity: students with 
higher levels of literacy tend to initiate more on-task interactions. 
• H6c – vocality promoting interaction attractiveness: students 
with higher levels of whole-classroom vocality tend to receive more on- 
task interactions. 
• H6b – literacy promoting interaction attractiveness: students 
with higher levels of literacy tend to receive more on-task interactions. 
Based on the theory of homophily (Byrne, 1971; Turner et al., 1987) 
and previous research showing that students generally tend to prefer 
interactions with similar friends (Block and Grund, 2014), it is plausible 
to assume that students with comparable communication skills and lit­
eracy will naturally pair, valuing clear mutual understanding without 
the need for extended clarifications. Hence: 
• H7a – vocality homophily: students tend to choose groupmates 
with similar levels of vocality when initiating on-task interactions. 
• H7b – literacy homophily: students tend to choose groupmates 
with similar levels of literacy when initiating on-task interactions. 
2.4. Group-level aspects of interaction 
We expect group size to influence interaction equality among stu­
dents. Groups of three have often been criticized by researchers who 
suggest that these groups lead to a higher probability of one of the 
students being excluded from active group participation, especially if 
one of the students does not have good relations with the other two, 
while the other two are friends (Cullingford, 1988). On the other hand, it 
was found that smaller groups generally allow a more even participation 
of all students (Kutnick et al., 2002; Kutnick and Blatchford, 2014). We 
deem preferential attachment as a proxy for general tendencies for un­
equal distribution of interactions, because it shows how unequal dis­
tribution of interactions stems purely from previous interactions in that 
group. Hence: 
• H8a – group size influencing preferential attachment: smaller 
group size decreases the effect of preferential attachment on interaction. 
• H8b – group size influencing the effect of friendship ties: 
smaller group size decreases the effect of preferential attachment on 
interaction. 
We also expect group vocality and literacy composition to shape the 
dynamics of student interaction patterns within group work. Existing 
research provides mixed insights on the role of ability composition in 
group dynamics. For instance, Lou et al. (1996) found that homogeneity 
in group ability could enhance outcomes, but this does not consistently 
apply to groups with uniformly low abilities. Conversely, Webb (1991) 
observed that in groups of high-ability students, communication was 
often stifled due to a mistaken belief that all members knew how to solve 
a given problem. These findings suggest that both the average ability of a 
group and the diversity of abilities within the group may moderate the 
importance of the individuals’ attributes. A higher average level of 
vocality and literacy within a group suggests that members collectively 
possess strong communication and comprehension skills, which could 
lead to more balanced participation based on their vocality and literacy 
as each member feels competent to contribute. On the other hand, 
greater heterogeneity may introduce a wider range of perspectives and 
problem-solving approaches, potentially enriching the group’s collabo­
rative process. This diversity also means that the influence of any single 
student’s specific level of vocality or literacy might be diluted, as the 
group’s dynamic becomes less about individual contributions and more 
about leveraging the collective skill set. Thus, we hypothesize that 
groups with both higher averages and greater diversity in vocality and 
literacy will exhibit more equitable interaction patterns, as the variance 
in individual attributes is balanced by the group’s overall composition, 
reducing the dominance of specific characteristics on group interaction. 
Hence: 
• H9a – group average vocality and heterogeneity influencing 
the role of individual students’ vocality on interaction: higher 
average group vocality level and heterogeneity decrease the effect of 
individuals’ vocality on interaction. 
• H9b – group average literacy and heterogeneity influencing 
the role of individual students’ literacy on interaction: higher 
average group literacy level and heterogeneity decrease the effect of 
individuals’ literacy on interaction. 
3. Data and methods 
3.1. Research context 
The data this research is based on were collected for a larger research 
project called Collectivity in dialogic learning: An interventional study. The 
main aim of the project was to determine whether an intervention led by 
researchers among comprehensive lower-secondary class teachers could 
enhance classroom communication. Half of the classrooms in the sample 
underwent an intervention focused on classroom dialogue. Employing 
collaborative group work was a part of the intervention, with each 
interventional classroom experiencing two lessons containing group 
work – our data came from these lessons. All group work took place 
during Czech language lessons. The group work all had a similar struc­
ture – groups were given a worksheet and everyone in the group was 
instructed to collaborate with each other to complete the worksheet. 
Each group work was supposed to take approximately ten minutes, 
however, the groups greatly differed in how much time they spent 
interacting – some were interacting for only over a minute, while others 
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
16 
were interacting for almost thirty minutes. 
3.2. Ethics 
Oral consent from school principals and teachers and written consent 
from the teachers and parents of participating students were obtained. 
The students were able to withdraw from research at any time. All 
procedures were performed in compliance with Masaryk University’s 
institutional guidelines on ethics in research. 
3.3. Data collection 
We collected data during the 2021/2022 school year. We collected 
data on interactions between students in groups during collaborative 
group work, relational data on peer friendships, and student-level at­
tributes of talk during regular whole-classroom lessons and reading lit­
eracy levels. 
For the data on interactions, two members of the research team 
visited the lessons and videorecorded all group work with one or two 
recording devices per group work making it possible to identify who was 
speaking, at what time, and what the content of the communication was. 
In each classroom, the group work took place twice during the 2021/ 
2022 school year. We worked with a total of 806 minutes of recorded 
material. 
We acquired the relational data denoting friendship ties between the 
students with a pen-and-paper sociometric questionnaire consisting of a 
single nomination question (Del Vecchio, 2011; Poulin & Dishion, 2008) 
worded as “Write the names of the classmates you are friends with. You 
can write as many names as you want. The order of the names does not 
make any difference.” A trained researcher administered the question­
naire in group settings in the classrooms during school lessons and 
provided the students with the necessary assistance. We collected rela­
tional data at two timepoints – at the beginning and at the end of the 
school year. For the purposes of this study, we used only the relational 
data from the beginning of the school year as all group work took place 
closer to the beginning of the school year and we assumed the in­
teractions among students to be the result of their relationships and not 
vice-versa. 
We acquired the data on whole-classroom talk with video recordings 
of the lessons. We recorded two consecutive Czech language lessons in 
each classroom at the beginning and at the end of the 2021/2022 school 
year, assessed the length of each student’s on-task communication in 
seconds with the help of EduCoM – a specialized mobile application 
designed for bulk collection of educational communication data in 
classrooms (ˇSvaˇríˇcek and Chmelík, 2018), and averaged the students’ 
talk in seconds across the two consecutive lessons. Again, for the pur­
poses of this study, we used only the whole-classroom talk data from the 
beginning of the school year. Finally, we acquired the data on student 
literacy levels with a standardized computer-based reading literacy test 
by SCIO (2023) that was administered at schools at the beginning and 
end of the school year. The test contained 26 items covering five areas of 
literacy – distinguishing between opinions and judgements, dis­
tinguishing between subjective and objective statements, identifying 
manipulative communication in mass-media, using text as a study 
resource, and forming new text. Students could score anywhere from 
−100–100 points – a student would get −100 points if they answered all 
items incorrectly, 0 points if they did not answer any item, and 100 if 
they answered all the items correctly. The version with the negative 
scoring system was validated by SCIO and recommended for use as a 
measure of literacy. As with the other measures from both the beginning 
and end of the school year, for the purposes of this study, we used only 
the reading literacy score from the beginning of the school year. 
3.4. Participants 
Our sample comprised 145 students in the sixth grade (age 12–13) in 
six different classrooms mixed into 62 groups. Most of the students were 
part of both group work sessions during the school year, however, 
neither of the groups were the same in those two group work sessions. 
We therefore treated the 62 groups as independent of each other. Our 
sample was gender-balanced with 78 (53.1 %) girls and 72 (46.9 %) 
boys. The average vocality level of the participants was 11.9 (SD = 14.6) 
– in other words, the students spent on average 11.9 seconds talking 
during whole-classroom lessons. The average literacy level of the par­
ticipants was 43.5 (SD = 22.9). We had 12.4 % whole-classroom talk 
data and 10.3 % literacy data missing. We had 14 (22.6 %) groups of 
three, 41 (66.1 %) groups of four, and 7 (11.3 %) groups of five students. 
The groups showed a large variance in the average vocality composition 
(mean = 10.9, SD = 7.9) and the average literacy composition (mean =
42.1, SD = 14.2). 
3.5. Coding interactions 
We transcribed the recorded classroom group work into a text. Using 
both the text and the recordings, we coded the interactions into time- 
ordered and time-stamped relational event data. The basic unit of our 
analysis was a relational event denoting a directed tie from one student 
to another – or to the whole group – embedded in time as described by 
Butts (2008) and by Stadtfeld and Block (2017). Each relational event 
contained a sender, a receiver, and a time in seconds from the beginning 
of the group work when the interaction occurred. Since most of the 
relational events were very brief (~1 sec), we did not separate the 
beginning and the end of the relational event; instead, we only coded the 
beginning of the event. We coded both on-task and off-task interaction. 
On-task communication related to the task the group was working on – it 
included substantive communication relating to solving the task, but 
also communication around organizing students’ workload. Off-task 
communication did not relate to the task the group was working on. 
We did not distinguish between the different types of interaction – e.g., 
questions, answers, comments. The full codebook used to create the 
interactional data is available as Supplementary Material S1. The coding 
was performed by two of the authors of this study with 10 % of the 
material being double-coded. We calculated the interrater agreement 
with a Krippendorff’s Alpha calculated in R (R Core Team, 2021) 
package icr (Staudt and L’Ecuyer, 2020) yielding an agreement of 0.872 
(SD = 0.018) for the senders and 0.871 (SD = 0.019) for the receivers 
denoting high interrater agreement. In total, we worked with 5333 
relational events – 4721 on-task and 610 off-task. Fig. 1 shows the 
number of relational events by type by group. The groups showed a large 
variance in the number of both on-task and off-task events (meantotal =
86.0, SDtotal = 61.1, meanon-task = 76.2, SDon-task = 59.1, meanoff-task =
9.8, SDoff-task = 9.7). 
3.6. Handling missing data 
We imputed the missing student covariates by a multiple imputation 
method. We assumed the covariates to be missing at random and applied 
multiple imputation by chained equations with a predictive mean 
matching imputation technique (Little, 1988). We imputed the cova­
riates under a fully conditional specification using the default settings of 
R package mice (van Buuren and Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011). Since 
multiple imputation requires each model to be calculated multiple times 
and our models required a significant amount of time for the estimation 
procedure, calculating many datasets for missing covariate imputation 
was prohibitive. We therefore decided to rely on the lower side of the 
recommended number of datasets for imputation (van Buuren, 2018) 
and made five datasets. We calculated the estimates in each imputed 
dataset separately and combined them using Rubin’s rules (Rubin, 
1987). 
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
17 
3.7. Analytical strategy 
Network models are usually limited to estimation of parameters of a 
single network. Two streams of approaches emerged when dealing with 
multiple networks – a single-step multilevel approach and a two-step 
meta-analytic approach. There is inconclusive evidence about the ac­
curacy of one approach over another. However, it was argued that the 
decision to choose between the two should be guided by theoretical 
assumptions about data-generating process – if it is assumed that the 
networks come from a single distribution, a single-step approach should 
be used; on the other hand, if it is assumed that the networks come from 
different contexts or clusters, a two-step approach should be used 
(Tolochko and Boomgaarden, 2024). Furthermore, the approach is often 
guided by practical aspects, such as the degree of implementation of the 
approaches for different models. 
Here, we decided on the two-step meta-analytic approach using 
dynamic network actor models (DyNAMs; Stadtfeld and Block, 2017). 
Considering the differences in the numbers of events between the group 
work sessions and sampling from different classrooms and different 
schools, we assumed the data to come from different distributions. Also, 
at the time of our analysis, goldfish.latent package built for the single-step 
multilevel DyNAMs (Uzaheta et al., 2023) was not in a stage of imple­
mentation that would allow us to use it as necessary in our research. 
3.7.1. Dynamic network actor models 
The first step of our analysis consisted of fitting DyNAMs with the 
same specifications to each individual group work session. DyNAMs aim 
to capture the network nature of interaction by explicitly modeling 
emerging network patterns over time as decisions made by the actors 
about when and with whom they interact. The model aims to explain the 
emergence of relational events. In our case, the dependent variable of 
the model is the emergence of an on-task relational event in log odds 
ratios conditioned on a predefined set of effects based on previous 
events, network structure, relationships between students, and student 
attributes. We did not model the emergence of off-task relational events 
and we used them only as a trigger of the on-task events, because we did 
not have enough off-task events in our data allowing meaningful off-task 
interaction models. The DyNAMs consist of two submodels – rate and 
choice. The rate submodel contains effects relating to the general 
activity of students. The choice submodel contains effects relating to the 
tendency of students to choose certain groupmates for interaction 
(Stadtfeld and Block, 2017). 
Since a nonnegligible number of the relational events contained ut­
terances aimed at the whole group (Non-task = 523, 11.1 %on-task, Noff-task 
= 77, 12.6 %off-task) and the DyNAMs are not currently built to allow the 
combination of relational events directed at specific actors along with 
the relational events directed at the whole group, we had to address the 
problem of having events directed at the whole group. We did not want 
to disregard them, as this would result in lower statistics for the activity 
of many students frequently addressing the whole group. We therefore 
decided to employ the following permutation method: if a student 
addressed the whole group, we told the model to randomly select one of 
the other students in the group as the receiver; we did this with all cases 
of a student addressing the whole group within that group session; we 
calculated the model with data containing the relational events 
addressed at students individually with all cases of events addressed to 
the whole group substituted; we performed the procedure 100 times; we 
aggregated the results of the individual models by averaging the log 
odds ratios and calculating root-mean-square error from the individual 
models’ standard errors. Because of this procedure along with the mice 
procedure, getting estimates from one model from a single group work 
session took 30 minutes on average. We calculated DyNAMs in R 
package goldfish (Hollway and Stadtfeld, 2022). 
3.7.2. Model specification 
We fitted two distinct DyNAM model specifications – a baseline 
model fitted to all 62 groups and a full model fitted to 39 group. The two 
specifications stem from the fact that the size or composition of some 
groups prevented fitting the full model specification. For example, we 
could not include triadic terms on groups of three. We also could not 
include student attribute effects on groups containing students with very 
similar levels of vocality or literacy. The subsample of 39 groups used for 
the full model did not significantly differ from the other groups included 
in the full sample in the number of events per group (p = 0.253), vocality 
composition (p = 0.256), or literacy composition (p = 0.421). 
Due to the small sizes of our groups, we had to decide on the rele­
vance of the included effects as some effects were highly collinear. We 
decided not to include any gender and socioeconomic status (SES) ef­
fects. The average gender homophily index on friendship ties across the 
sample classrooms was 0.5 and gender terms were thus highly collinear 
with the friendship tie effect. Student SES, on the other hand, was 
correlated with both vocality (r = 0.2) and literacy (r = 0.2) and in 
combination with the small groups, including SES in the models along 
with vocality and literacy resulted in model convergence issues. We gave 
preference to the inclusion of vocality and literacy effects due to their 
more direct and observable impact on group dynamics and task-related 
interactions. 
In 22 (35.5 %) groups, there was no off-task interaction and in 7 
(11.3 %) groups, there were either friendship ties between all group 
members or between none of them. Hence, in some groups, it was 
principally impossible to include effects testing H2c – off-task to on- 
task interaction and H5 – interaction preference from friendship 
ties. We opted not to create separate model specifications for them. 
Maintaining a unified model approach across groups, despite the lack of 
off-task interaction and varying friendship ties in some, allowed us to 
avoid fragmenting the data, which would reduce the overall clarity of 
the analysis. We conducted sensitivity analyses to test if the effect esti­
mates were significantly different for groups that included off-task in­
teractions and friendship ties compared to those that did not. The 
sensitivity analysis indicated no substantial effect of the incomplete 
model specification on our interpretation of the results, thereby rein­
forcing our decision to treat those groups uniformly within our analyt­
ical framework. Results of the sensitivity analysis are available as 
Supplementary Material S2. 
As we worked with small networks which quickly became complete 
Fig. 1. Number of relational events in the groups.  
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
18 
graphs, we had to decide on time windows for some effects. We set a 
default 20-second window for dyadic effects and a 40-second window 
for triadic effects as double the window for the dyadic effects as they 
require one event more. We based our decision on the observation of 
distribution of reciprocated sequence times. We defined reciprocated 
sequence time as the difference in times between two events, not 
necessarily immediately subsequent, where the second one was a 
reciprocation of the first one. We did not consider the strict AB-BA 
participation shifts occurring as two immediately following events 
described in Butts (2008), because our groups would sometimes split 
into two separate simultaneous conversations in pairs. If we worked 
with the strict definition of the participation shifts, we would have 
missed some of the actual reciprocated events as in the time, as two 
simultaneous conversations would be overlapping in time. Fig. 2 shows 
the distribution of reciprocated sequence times. The distribution is 
long-tailed with most reciprocated events occurring within that 20-sec­
ond window. 
The baseline model is the most comprehensive specification that 
could be fitted to all 62 groups. Apart from intercept, the rate submodel 
contains the following effects: 
• egobursty behavior testing H1 – general burstiness tendency. It cap­
tures the probability of initiating an on-task interaction with any 
groupmate conditioned on an initiation of on-task event in the window 
of the previous 20 seconds by any student in the group. bursty behavior 
serves as a dynamic dummy variable, which is same for all students, but 
which changes in time as a rolling window of 20 seconds. If any on-task 
event is initiated, all students in that group are “triggered” for 
20 seconds assuming that recent activity will trigger future activity and 
it therefore aims to capture general burstiness tendency independent of 
any specific connections or attributes. 
• indegweighted and outdegweighted testing H3a and H3b – ego type in/ 
outdegree preferential attachment. They capture the tendency to 
initiate on-task interaction if previously receiving/initiating many on- 
task interactions. We used weighted specifications for the in and out­
degree terms as we wanted to capture the cumulative tendency of those 
who initiate and receive many interactions to initiate more interaction 
in future. 
The choice submodel contains the following effects: 
• inertia testing H2a – repeated interaction. It captures the ten­
dency to choose a groupmate for on-task interaction if they initiated 
interaction towards that groupmate before – in other words, the ten­
dency to repeat existing ties rather than create new ones. 
• tieon-task interaction weighted testing H2b – cumulative repeated 
interaction. It captures the increased tendency to choose a groupmate 
for on-task interaction with each repeated initiated on-task interactions 
with that groupmate before. 
• tieoff-task interaction weighted testing H2c – off-task to on-task interac­
tion. It captures the increased tendency to choose a groupmate for on- 
task interaction with each repeated initiated off-task interactions with 
that groupmate before. It serves as a cross-network term controlling for 
the effect of off-task interactions on-task interactions. 
• indegweighted and outdegweighted testing H3c and H3d – alter type in/ 
outdegree preferential attachment. They capture the tendency to 
receive on-task interaction if previously receiving/initiating many on- 
task interactions. As with the rate submodel terms, we used weighted 
specifications aiming to capture the cumulative tendency of those who 
initiate and receive many interactions to receive more interaction in 
future. 
• recipwindow20 testing H4a – reciprocity. It captures the tendency to 
reciprocate on-task interactions within the window of 20 seconds of 
receiving it. 
• tiefriendship testing H5 – interaction preference from friendship 
ties. It captures the tendency of students to choose those groupmates as 
receivers of their on-task interaction whom they consider friends. 
The full model tests all our hypotheses and could be fitted to 39 
groups. It contains all effects included in the baseline model plus triadic 
and attribute-based effects. The rate submodel contains the following 
effects: 
• egowhole-class. talk testing H6a – vocality promoting interaction 
activity. It captures the tendency of students with higher levels of 
vocality to initiate more on-task interactions. 
• egoliteracy testing H6b – literacy promoting interaction activity. It 
captures the tendency of students with higher levels of literacy to initiate 
more on-task interactions. 
The choice submodel contains the following effects: 
• transwindow40 testing H4b – transitive closure. It captures the 
tendency to interact in a way that forms the transitive pattern of an 
event i→j closing more two-paths (i→k→j). 
• cyclewindow40 testing H4c – cyclic closure. It captures the tendency 
to interact in a way that forms the cyclic patterns of an event i→j closing 
more two-paths (j→k→i). 
• alterwhole-class. talk testing H6c – vocality promoting interaction 
attractiveness. It captures the tendency of students with higher levels of 
vocality to receive more on-task interactions. 
• alterliteracy testing H6d – literacy promoting interaction attrac­
tiveness. It captures the tendency of students with higher levels literacy 
to receive more on-task interactions. 
• sim
whole-class talk testing H7a – vocality homophily. It captures 
the tendency to choose groupmates with similar levels of vocality when 
initiating on-task interactions. 
• sim
literacy testing H7b – literacy homophily. It captures the 
tendency to choose groupmates with similar levels of literacy when 
initiating on-task interactions. 
3.7.3. Meta-analysis 
The second step of our analysis consisted of aggregating the results 
from the individual DyNAMs. Pooling the estimates across the groups 
resulted in overall model estimates. We pooled the estimates with a 
random-effect meta-analysis in R package metafor (Viechtbauer, 2010), 
assuming that the observed estimates varied across the groups both 
because of real differences in the effect sizes in each group and because 
of the sampling variability. 
3.7.4. Meta-regression 
The third step of our analysis consisted of fitting meta-regression 
models with group size and composition as moderator variables. Meta- 
regression allows for the investigation of the relationships between 
group-level variables and effect sizes across multiple models fitted to 
Fig. 2. Distribution of reciprocated sequence times.  
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
19 
individual groups. It seeks to understand the heterogeneity in effect sizes 
by examining how they are influenced by external factors. To test H8a – 
group size influencing equality of interaction and explore whether 
smaller group size is related to weaker preferential attachment ten­
dencies, we used group size as a moderator variable for the indeg and 
outdeg effects. A negative coefficient for group size would indicate that 
in smaller groups, interaction among students is less centralized around 
a small number of students and the interaction is therefore more equal. 
To test H8b – group size influencing the effect of friendship ties and 
explore whether smaller group size increases the effect of friendship ties 
on interaction, we used group size as a moderator variable for the tie­
friendship effect. We used the baseline model to test the moderating role of 
the group size as it could be fitted to all 62 groups. To test H9a – group 
average vocality and heterogeneity influencing the role of indi­
vidual students’ vocality on interaction, we used the mean, SD, and 
the interaction between the two as moderator variables for the egowhole- 
class. talk, alterwhole-class. talk, and sim
whole-class. talk effects. To test H9b – 
group average literacy and heterogeneity influencing the role of 
individual students’ literacy on interaction, we used the mean, SD, 
and the interaction between the two as moderator variables for the 
egoliteracy, alterliteracy, and sim
literacy effects. 
4. Results 
Fig. 3 shows the event timelines across the groups. Three striking 
patterns are apparent. First, interaction in all groups exhibit burstiness – 
the events are not evenly distributed in time, they occur in clusters of 
high-activity periods split by low-activity periods with no interaction. 
Second, on-task and off-task interactions do not mix – there are periods 
of on-task interactions, periods of off-task interactions, but not periods 
of combined on- and off-task interactions. Third, off-task interaction 
periods often precede on-task interaction periods. Most group work 
sessions start with a period of off-task interactions followed by one or 
more periods of on-task interactions. 
4.1. What influences interaction dynamics in classroom group work? 
Table 1 shows the pooled DyNAM estimates with their associated 
standard errors (SE) and p-values. Neither the baseline nor the full 
model shows a significant egobursty behavior effect, thus providing no evi­
dence for the general tendency of burstiness in a sense of having 
increased activity due to occurrence of recent previous activity in the 
group. The observed burstiness seen in Fig. 3 is therefore caused by other 
mechanisms. Both models show positive and significant inertia and tieon- 
task interaction weighted effects, suggesting that students tend to prefer 
repeated on-task interactions with the same groupmates, and that ten­
dency increases with each repeated initiated on-task interactions with 
that groupmate before. Both models also show a positive and significant 
tieoff-task interaction weighted effect – although borderline significant in the full 
model – suggesting that off-task interaction leads to on-task interaction. 
Except for the indegweighted effect in the choice submodel and outdegweighted 
effect in the rate submodel in the full specification, the indeg and outdeg 
effects are positive and significant, suggesting that those who initiate 
and receive many on-task interactions are more likely to initiate future 
on-task interactions, and those who initiate many on-task interactions 
are more likely to receive future on-task interactions. This results in 
interaction-wise active and/or popular students being engaged in in­
teractions disproportionately more than others. The models further 
show positive and significant recipwindow20, transwindow40, and cycle­
window40 effects, suggesting that students tend to reciprocate on-task 
interaction and form both transitive and cyclic patterns of on-task 
interaction. Both models show a positive and significant tiefriendship ef­
fect, suggesting that students prefer initiating on-task interactions with 
groupmates they consider friends. In the full model, all ego and alter 
effects are positive and significant, suggesting that students who are 
vocal in whole-classroom lessons and students with higher levels of 
literacy are more likely to initiate and receive on-task interaction in 
group work. Both sim 
effects are also positive and significant, sug­
gesting that students tend to choose groupmates with similar levels of 
vocality and literacy when initiating on-task interactions. 
4.2. How does group composition influence interaction dynamics in 
classroom group work? 
Table 2 shows the results of the meta-regression models. The models 
do not support the hypothesis that the size of the group would have any 
effect on the preferential attachment in interaction, with group size not 
being a significant moderator for any of the indeg and outdeg effects. The 
models also do not support the hypothesis that the group average lit­
eracy or heterogeneity would have any moderating effect on egoliteracy, 
alterliteracy, or sim
literacy effects. On the other hand, the models suggest 
that larger group size is related to a lower tiefriendship effect. It supports 
Fig. 3. Event timelines across the groups. Each tick denotes a single relational event in time.  
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
20 
our hypothesis that in groups of three, the effect of friendships on 
preference for initiating interactions is higher than in larger groups and 
that a student without any friend is more likely to be excluded from 
interaction in groups of three. The models further provide tentative 
evidence that a higher average student vocality level in group is related 
to a lower egowhole-class. talk effect, hence, lower tendency of vocal students 
to be more active in initiating on-task interactions. The models also 
provide tentative evidence that a higher heterogeneity of student 
vocality in group is related to a lower sim
whole-class. talk effect, hence, 
lower tendency of students to choose groupmates with similar levels of 
vocality when initiating on-task interactions. 
5. Discussion and conclusion 
In this study, we explored the interaction dynamics of lower- 
secondary students in collaborative group work sessions. We 
addressed the gap in the literature stemming from the fact that inter­
action in group work has never been considered in its realistic nature: 
dynamic, relational, and actor-oriented. We employed a recent addition 
to the actor-based network model family – DyNAMs – suited for the 
study of fine-grained time-stamped interactional data. 
We found that interaction in group work is largely influenced by an 
array of endogenous structural mechanisms. These include reciprocity, 
transitivity, cyclicity, and preferential attachment. We also found 
interaction in group work to be influenced by the interaction repetition, 
Table 1 
Pooled DyNAM estimates.   
baseline model (62 groups) 
full model (39 groups) 
log 
(OR) 
SE 
p 
log 
(OR) 
SE 
p 
rate submodel       
intercept 
-2.245 
0.371 
<0.001 
-1.309 
0.550 
0.017 
egobursty behavior (H1 
– general 
burstiness 
tendency) 
0.106 
0.079 
0.177 
0.134 
0.091 
0.138 
indegweighted (H3a – 
ego type indeg. 
pref. attach.) 
0.039 
0.007 
<0.001 
0.068 
0.013 
<0.001 
outdegweighted (H3b – 
ego type outdeg. 
pref. attach.) 
0.029 
0.004 
<0.001 
-0.005 
0.013 
0.732 
egowhole-class. talk 
(H6a – vocality 
promoting 
interact. activity)    
0.020 
0.006 
<0.001 
egoliteracy (H6b – 
literacy promoting 
interact. activity)    
0.005 
0.001 
<0.001 
choice submodel       
inertia (H2a – 
repeated interact.) 
0.596 
0.079 
<0.001 
0.502 
0.031 
<0.001 
tieon-task interaction 
weighted (H2b – 
cumulative 
repeated interact.) 
0.079 
0.015 
<0.001 
0.079 
0.031 
0.012 
tieoff-task interaction 
weighted (H2c – off- 
task to on-task 
interact.) 
0.213 
0.081 
0.009 
0.447 
0.265 
0.092 
indegweighted (H3c – 
alter type indeg. 
pref. attach.) 
0.031 
0.030 
0.301 
-0.032 
0.088 
0.714 
outdegweighted (H3d – 
alter type outdeg. 
pref. attach.) 
0.118 
0.015 
<0.001 
0.166 
0.027 
<0.001 
recipwindow20 (H4a – 
reciprocity) 
1.038 
0.104 
<0.001 
1.140 
0.150 
<0.001 
trans window40 (H4b – 
transitive closure)    
0.342 
0.110 
0.002 
cycle window40 (H4c – 
cyclic closure)    
0.616 
0.074 
<0.001 
tiefriendship (H5 – 
interact. 
preference from 
friendship ties) 
0.448 
0.068 
<0.001 
0.912 
0.244 
<0.001 
alterwhole-class. talk 
(H6c – vocality 
promoting 
interact. attract.)    
0.068 
0.011 
<0.001 
alterliteracy (H6d – 
literacy promoting 
interact. attract.)    
0.018 
0.008 
0.021 
simwhole-class talk (H7a 
– vocality 
homophily)    
0.153 
0.080 
0.055 
simiteracy (H7b – 
literacy 
homophily)    
0.045 
0.010 
<0.001  
Table 2 
Meta-regression results.   
log 
(OR) 
SE 
p 
rate indegweighted (H8a – group size and equality)    
intercept 
0.073 
0.051 
0.147 
group size 
-0.009 
0.013 
0.491 
rate outdegweighted (H8a – group size and equality)    
intercept 
0.052 
0.038 
0.175 
group size 
-0.006 
0.010 
0.552 
choice indegweighted (H8a – group size and 
equality)    
intercept 
0.138 
0.215 
0.522 
group size 
-0.027 
0.053 
0.613 
choice outdegweighted (H8a – group size and 
equality)    
intercept 
0.236 
0.104 
0.023 
group size 
-0.030 
0.026 
0.254 
choice tiefriendship (H8b – group size and effects of 
friendships)    
intercept 
1.455 
0.541 
0.007 
group size 
-0.241 
0.129 
0.061 
rate egowhole-class. talk (H9a – group av. vocality and 
heterogeneity)    
intercept 
0.061 
0.019 
0.001 
group average vocality 
-0.002 
0.001 
0.098 
vocality heterogeneity 
-0.003 
0.003 
0.246 
group average vocality*heterogeneity 
0.000 
0.000 
0.245 
choice alterwhole-class. talk (H9a – group av. vocality 
and heterogeneity)    
intercept 
0.280 
0.169 
0.097 
group average vocality 
-0.010 
0.008 
0.214 
vocality heterogeneity 
-0.013 
0.027 
0.614 
group average vocality*heterogeneity 
0.001 
0.001 
0.666 
choice simwhole-class. talk (H9a – group av. vocality 
and heterogeneity)    
intercept 
0.545 
0.300 
0.070 
group average vocality 
-0.004 
0.022 
0.847 
vocality heterogeneity 
-0.081 
0.047 
0.087 
group average vocality*heterogeneity 
0.003 
0.002 
0.138 
rate egoliteracy (H9b – group av. literacy and 
heterogeneity)    
intercept 
0.030 
0.030 
0.310 
group average literacy 
-0.001 
0.001 
0.485 
literacy heterogeneity 
-0.001 
0.002 
0.744 
group average literacy*heterogeneity 
0.000 
0.000 
0.794 
choice alterliteracy (H9b – group av. literacy and 
heterogeneity)    
intercept 
-0.067 
0.123 
0.585 
group average literacy 
0.003 
0.003 
0.396 
literacy heterogeneity 
0.010 
0.011 
0.358 
group average literacy*heterogeneity 
-0.000 
0.000 
0.313 
choice simliteracy (H9b – group av. literacy and 
heterogeneity)    
intercept 
0.060 
0.116 
0.605 
group average literacy 
0.000 
0.003 
0.885 
literacy heterogeneity 
0.001 
0.015 
0.941 
group average literacy*heterogeneity 
-0.000 
0.000 
0.799  
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
21 
with students giving preference to initiating interactions with those they 
initiated interactions with before, including both on- and off-task in­
teractions. Hence, off-task interaction also contributed to development 
of on-task interaction. While we observed strong patterns of bursty 
behavior in our data, modelling burstiness per se as a mechanism 
influencing event formation yielded non-significant results. Hence, the 
observed burstiness in the groups was probably caused by the windowed 
reciprocity, transitivity, and cyclicity effects, as these stem from recent 
previous interactions and lead to new interactions. We further found 
interaction in group work to be largely influenced by friendship ties 
between students, with students giving strong preference to initiating 
interactions with those they consider friends. We found evidence that 
those students who talk a lot during regular whole-classroom lessons 
and students with high levels of literacy tend to both initiate and receive 
more interactions in group work, and students similar in these attributes 
prefer to interact with each other. Finally, we found tentative evidence 
that the vocality composition of the groups moderated the effects of 
unequal student interaction based on their level of vocality. We found 
that higher average group vocality was related to lower tendency of 
vocal students to be more active in initiating interactions and higher 
group vocality heterogeneity was related to lower tendency of students 
to choose groupmates with similar levels of vocality when initiating 
interactions. 
The strong presence of the structural endogenous mechanisms in 
interaction mirrors our expectations and previous research of interper­
sonal and communication ties (Kossinets and Watts, 2006; Le et al., 
2018; Rivera et al., 2010; Slavin et al., 2003; Ten Bosch et al., 2005). Our 
results suggest that while many aspects might influence interaction in 
group work, the endogenous mechanisms influence it the most. The 
presence of the temporal mechanisms in interaction including the 
preference for repeated on-task interactions and the influence of off-task 
interactions on-task interactions also mirror our expectations and pre­
vious research on group dynamics (Miritello, 2013; Langer-Osuna et al., 
2020). Taken together, our findings show that ignoring the relational 
and dynamic nature of small group interaction in educational settings 
leads to neglecting a substantial portion of the mechanisms driving 
group interactions. 
The strong preference of students to interact with friends makes the 
inconclusive results found in previous literature more conclusive. Pre­
vious research found that friends in group work frequently engage in off- 
task activities (Chiriac and Granstr¨om, 2012; Myers, 2012). While this 
might be true; we found friendships ties to enhance on-task communi­
cation as well. The question is how our finding relates to the previously 
described tendency of students to exclude students with whom they do 
not have good relationships (Cullingford, 1988). We believe our findings 
support this thesis. If there is a group of four students and three of those 
students consider each other friends, our strong positive estimate of 
friendship ties suggests that those three students will give strong pref­
erence to interaction with each other, while the fourth student will 
remain excluded. The results of our meta-regression model further 
support the thesis that a student is most likely to be excluded from 
interaction if they are without friends in groups of three. In a more equal 
scenario – a group of four in which two of the students consider each 
other friends, while the other two are not friends with anyone in the 
group – the two students who are not friends with anyone are also more 
likely to be excluded from interaction because they are less likely to 
communicate with the two students who are friends as well as less likely 
to communicate with each other. In a scenario with two pairs of friends, 
students may end up interact mostly within the friendship pairs, with the 
group virtually operating as two groups. 
Our findings related to the effects of student attributes support 
expectation states theory (Berger and Conner, 1969; Correll and 
Ridgeway, 2003) suggesting that pre-existing status characteristics in­
fluence group work dynamics. Furthermore, our findings suggest that 
certain groups of students tend to be disadvantaged in group work by 
actively engaging in communication less and these groups of students 
are those who are already disadvantaged in education. Both silent 
(Sedova et al., 2019) and low-literacy (Meneghetti et al., 2006) students 
have worse academic performances than their vocal and high-literacy 
counterparts. If we accept the proposition that those who actively 
engage in group work most are those who benefit from group work most, 
we may interpret our findings as indicating that group work acts as 
another mechanism through which disadvantaged students in education 
get more disadvantaged, while those who are already successful accu­
mulate even more advantages. 
Our findings related to the effect of group size and composition in 
interaction dynamics generally do not support earlier findings. We 
found little support for the thesis that smaller groups allow more even 
participation of all students (Kutnick et al., 2002; Kutnick and Blatch­
ford, 2014). However, it is important to note that we operationalized 
even participation as low preferential attachment tendencies, which 
differs from measures used in other studies. Our approach to even 
participation emphasizes the effect of cumulative advantage of active 
and popular students in time, rather than the raw distribution of con­
tributions. Also, we modelled only the differences among groups of 
three, four, and five students; we are therefore unable to capture any 
effect of group size if group size becomes significant with a larger 
number of students. 
Our findings related to the effect of group vocality composition on 
equality of interaction suggest that communication group norms may 
shift with changing group compositions. When the average group level 
of vocality is high, the effect of vocal students to initiate more in­
teractions is less pronounced. At the same time, when the group com­
prises students with a diverse range of vocality levels, the effect of 
vocality homophily is less pronounced. This pattern may be attributed to 
the diffusion of expectations across members when overall group 
vocality is high, diluting the influence of any single vocal student. In 
such settings, the collective confidence to speak up may encourage even 
the typically less vocal students to participate more actively. Conversely, 
in groups with a diverse range of vocality levels, students may be more 
likely to modulate their participation to match their peers, which could 
diminish the vocality-based homophily. 
5.1. Limitations 
Our study has limitations stemming from the sample characteristics 
and from the study design. Our models are based on a non- 
representative sample of students from the Czech Republic, which 
makes generalizations of our findings difficult. Furthermore, because 
our groups were small, often had students with collinear characteristics, 
and because we applied the DyNAMs to the groups individually, we were 
unable to fit the full model testing all our hypotheses to all groups. We 
were also unable to model the effects of demographic student charac­
teristics, as including them made model convergence impossible. 
Finally, when dealing with interactions addressed to the whole group, 
we had to rely on a workaround involving the permutation method, as 
DyNAMs are not currently able to work with both dyadic and multicast 
interactions. It may be argued that interactions aimed at the whole 
group are qualitatively different than dyadic interactions, however, we 
treated them as qualitatively same as incorporating multiplex network 
structures into DyNAMs in currently not implemented and beyond the 
scope of this paper. Having an extension to DyNAMs making it possible 
to model both dyadic and multicast interactions would therefore be 
beneficial for modeling of many real-world situations. 
5.2. Implications 
Our study has several implications for practice. The strong effect of 
friendship ties on interaction in group work implies that when teachers 
form groups, they should not mix friends with non-friends together in 
the same group as those who are not friends with others in the group are 
at the risk of being excluded from the interaction. We therefore 
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
22 
recommend forming either groups comprising only friends or groups 
comprising only non-friends. Moreover, the moderating role of group 
vocality composition on equal interaction implies that it may be more 
beneficial to form groups so that they contain a diverse range of vocality 
levels. 
Our study has several implications for future research. We show that 
DyNAMs are a very useful tool for the study of real-world interaction 
between students. We show that DyNAMs are suitable to be fitted to 
groups ranging from three to five actors. In combination with the 
established meta-analytical procedures from social network models, we 
show that DyNAMs can be used to get effect estimates from several 
groups independently, with the results pooled to get overall estimates. 
We therefore believe that DyNAMs have the potential to serve as a strong 
analytical tool for the study of interaction in group work and for the 
study of interaction in whole-classroom settings. Given that structural 
endogenous mechanisms seem to influence interaction in group work 
more than any relational or attribute effects, any research aiming to 
explore interaction in group work should account for them, as the results 
may otherwise be invalid. Finally, because the size and composition of 
the groups prevented us from fitting the full model specification to all 
groups, in the future, it might be useful to get estimates from multiple 
groups using a multi-level framework with random-effects parameters 
(Uzaheta et al., 2023), and to compare the estimates from the 
meta-analytical framework with the estimates from the multi-level 
framework. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Tom´aˇs Lintner: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding 
acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – orig­
inal draft, Writing – review & editing. Barbora Nekardov´a: Investiga­
tion, Writing – review & editing. Tomas Divi´ak: Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declared no competing interests. 
Data availability 
The data that the paper is based on are publicly available in Men­
deley Data here: https://doi.org/10.17632/9c3dth6cwp.3 and a Data in 
Brief article describing the data has been published here: https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.dib.2023.109641. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by GA21-16021S research grant of the 
Czech Science Foundation. This work was also supported by the NPO 
‘Systemic Risk Institute’ number LX22NPO5101, funded by European 
Union—Next Generation EU (Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports, 
NPO: EXCELES). 
Appendix A. Supporting information 
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.socnet.2024.05.002. 
References 
Barabasi, A.L., 2005. The origin of bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics. Nature 435 
(7039), 207–211. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03459. 
Bearman, P., 1997. Generalized exchange. Am. J. Sociol. 102 (5), 1383–1415. https:// 
doi.org/10.1086/231087. 
Berger, J., Conner, T.L., 1969. Performance expectations and behavior in small groups. 
Acta Sociol. 12 (4), 186–198. https://doi.org/10.1177/000169936901200403. 
Block, P., Grund, T., 2014. Multidimensional homophily in friendship networks. Netw. 
Sci. 2 (2), 189–212. https://doi.org/10.1017/nws.2014.17. 
Butts, C.T., 2008. A relational event framework for social action. Sociol. Methodol. 38 
(1), 155–200. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9531.2008.00203.x. 
van Buuren, S., 2018. Flexible Imputation of Missing Data, 2nd Ed. CRC Press. 
van Buuren, S., Groothuis-Oudshoorn, K., 2011. mice: multivariate imputation by 
chained equations in R. J. Stat. Softw. 45, 1–67. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v045. 
i03. 
Byrne, D.E., 1971. The Attraction Paradigm. Academic Press, New York.  
Chiriac, E.H., Granstr¨om, K., 2012. Teachers’ leadership and students’ experience of 
group work. Teach. Teach. 18 (3), 345–363. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
13540602.2012.629842. 
Correll, S.J., Ridgeway, C.L., 2003. Expectation states theory. In Handbook of social 
psychology. Springer, Boston, MA, pp. 29–51. 
Cullingford, C., 1988. Children’s views about working together. Education 3-13 16 (1), 
29–34. https://doi.org/10.1080/03004278885200071. 
Felder, R.M., Brent, R., 1996. Navigating the bumpy road to student-centered instruction. 
Coll. Teach. 44 (2), 43–47. https://doi.org/10.1080/87567555.1996.9933425. 
Fung, D., 2022. Achieving individual and collaborative success: an investigation of 
guided group work and teacher participation in junior secondary science classrooms. 
Int. J. Educ. Res. 111, 101908 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2021.101908. 
Gillies, R.M., Boyle, M., 2010. Teachers’ reflections on cooperative learning: issues of 
implementation. Teach. Teach. Educ. 26 (4), 933–940. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tate.2009.10.034. 
Hollway, J., Stadtfeld, C., 2022. goldfish: statistical network models for dynamic network 
data. R. Package Version 1. 6. 4. 〈www.social-networks.ethz.ch/research/goldfish. 
html〉. 
Karsai, M., Kaski, K., Barab´asi, A.L., Kert´esz, J., 2012. Universal features of correlated 
bursty behaviour. Sci. Rep. 2 (1), 397. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep00397. 
Kossinets, G., Watts, D.J., 2006. Empirical analysis of an evolving social network. Science 
311 (5757), 88–90. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1116869. 
Kutnick, P., Blatchford, P., 2014. Effective Group Work in Primary School Classrooms. 
Springer, Dordrecht. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-6991-5.  
Kutnick, P., Blatchford, P., Baines, E., 2002. Pupil groupings in primary school 
classrooms: sites for learning and social pedagogy? Br. Educ. Res. J. 28 (2), 187–206. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01411920120122149. 
Langer-Osuna, J.M., Gargroetzi, E., Munson, J., Chavez, R., 2020. Exploring the role of 
off-task activity on students’ collaborative dynamics. J. Educ. Psychol. 112 (3), 
514–532. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000464. 
Le, H., Janssen, J., Wubbels, T., 2018. Collaborative learning practices: teacher and 
student perceived obstacles to effective student collaboration. Camb. J. Educ. 48 (1), 
103–122. https://doi.org/10.1080/0305764X.2016.1259389. 
Lehmann, S., 2019. Fundamental structures in temporal communication networks. In: 
Holme, P., Saram¨aki, J. (Eds.), Computational Social Sciences, Temporal Network 
Theory. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-23495-9_2.  
Little, R.J., 1988. Missing-data adjustments in large surveys. J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 6 (3), 
287–296. https://doi.org/10.2307/1391878. 
Lou, Y., Abrami, P.C., Spence, J.C., Poulsen, C., Chambers, B., d’Apollonia, S., 1996. 
Within-class grouping: a meta-analysis. Rev. Educ. Res. 66 (4), 423–458. https://doi. 
org/10.3102/00346543066004423. 
Mameli, C., Mazzoni, E., Molinari, L., 2015. Patterns of discursive interactions in primary 
classrooms: an application of social network analysis. Res. Pap. Educ. 30 (5), 
546–566. https://doi.org/10.1080/02671522.2015.1027727. 
Meneghetti, C., Carretti, B., De Beni, R., 2006. Components of reading comprehension 
and scholastic achievement. Learn. Individ. Differ. 16 (4), 291–301. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.lindif.2006.11.001. 
Miritello, G., 2013. Temporal Patterns of Communication in Social Networks. Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-00110-4. 
Myers, S.A., 2012. Students’ perceptions of classroom group work as a function of group 
member selection. Commun. Teach. 26 (1), 50–64. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17404622.2011.625368. 
Navarro, H., Miritello, G., Canales, A., Moro, E., 2017. Temporal patterns behind the 
strength of persistent ties. EPJ Data Sci. 6 (31), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1140/ 
epjds/s13688-017-0127-3. 
R Core Team, 2021. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. 〈https://www.R-project. 
org/〉.  
Rivera, M.T., Soderstrom, S.B., Uzzi, B., 2010. Dynamics of dyads in social networks: 
assortative, relational, and proximity mechanisms. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 36, 91–115. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.34.040507.134743. 
Rubin, D.B., 1987. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. John Wiley and 
Sons, New York.  
Ryu, S., Lombardi, D., 2015. Coding classroom interactions for collective and individual 
engagement. Educ. Psychol. 50 (1), 70–83. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00461520.2014.1001891. 
SCIO, 2023. Proj. Sch. 〈https://www.scio.cz/english/project-schools12.asp〉. 
Sedova, K., Sedlacek, M., Svaricek, R., Majcik, M., Navratilova, J., Drexlerova, A., 
Salamounova, Z., 2019. Do those who talk more learn more? The relationship 
between student classroom talk and student achievement. Learn. Instr. 63, 101217 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2019.101217. 
Slavin, R., Hurley, E.A., Chamberlain, A., 2003. Cooperative learning and achievement: 
theory and research. In: Reynolds, W.M., Miller, G.E. (Eds.), In Handbook of 
psychology: Educational psychology, Vol.7. Wiley, New York, pp. 177–198. 
Snijders, T.A., 2001. The statistical evaluation of social network dynamics. Sociol. 
Methodol. 31 (1), 361–395. https://doi.org/10.1111/0081-1750.00099. 
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
23 
Stadtfeld, C., Block, P., 2017. Interactions, actors, and time: dynamic network actor 
models for relational events. Sociol. Sci. 4, 318–352. https://doi.org/10.15195/v4. 
a14. 
Staudt, A., L’Ecuyer, P., 2020. icr: Compute Krippendorff’s Alpha. R. Package Version 
0 6, 2. 〈https://github.com/staudtlex/icr〉. 
ˇSvaˇríˇcek, R., Chmelík, J., 2018. EduCoM (2.2) [Mobile application software]. Masaryk 
University. 
Ten Bosch, L., Oostdijk, N., Boves, L., 2005. On temporal aspects of turn taking in 
conversational dialogues. Speech Commun. 47 (1-2), 80–86. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.specom.2005.05.009. 
Tolochko, P., Boomgaarden, H.G., 2024. Same but different: a comparison of estimation 
approaches for exponential random graph models for multiple networks. Soc. Netw. 
76, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2023.05.003. 
Turner, J.C., Hogg, M.A., Oakes, P.J., Reicher, S.D., Wetherell, M.S., 1987. Rediscovering 
the Social Group: A Self-categorization theory. Blackwell. 
Uzaheta, A., Amati, V., Stadtfeld, C., 2023. Random effects in dynamic network actor 
models. Netw. Sci. 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1017/nws.2022.37. 
Viechtbauer, W., 2010. Conducting meta-analyses in R with the metafor package. J. Stat. 
Softw. 36 (3), 1–48. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v036.i03. 
Wagner, C.J., Gonz´alez-Howard, M., 2018. Studying discourse as social interaction: the 
potential of social network analysis for discourse studies. Educ. Res. 47 (6), 375–383. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189×18777741. 
Webb, N.M., 1991. Task-related verbal interaction and mathematics learning in small 
groups. J. Res. Math. Educ. 22 (5), 366–389. https://doi.org/10.5951/ 
jresematheduc.22.5.0366. 
Webb, N.M., 2009. The teacher’s role in promoting collaborative dialogue in the 
classroom. Br. J. Educ. Psychol. 79 (1), 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1348/ 
000709908×380772. 
T. Lintner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Social Networks 79 (2024 ) 14–24 
24 
